OK,
so at this point we know what list comprehensions are.
So let's have a look at how they differ from a for loop and how useful they can be.
Now an important difference is that comprehensions don't have the side effects that you can get with
a for loop.
Now this course focuses on Python 3.
We have been covering many of the differences from Python 2, and we've tried to make many of the examples
work with Python 2, but it's really Python 3 that we're working with in this course. And now I'm mentioning
that because this next bit won't work in Python 2. The behavior
we're about to see doesn't happen in Python 2.
In fact, the author of Python, Guido van Rossum, called it one of Python's, or Python 2's, "dirty little
secrets" in a blog post.
So I'm going to come back to that.
First what I'll do is I'm going to close down centre_text.py.  We're going to open listcomp.py and
listfor.py from the previous video, so listcomp. Then I'm going to come up here and do a split again to
open it split vertically.
So I'm going to click over here to the right hand side, double click listfor and close down listcomp there.
So basically, we've now got listcomp and listfor open on the screen. Alright,
now as you probably recall they're very simple programs that create a list of squares.
Now this example's a bit contrived.
There aren't many lines of code so you probably wouldn't make the deliberate mistake that I'm about
to make.
Remember that your programs could have hundreds or even thousands of lines of code, and not all of it
may be written by the same person.
So bear that in mind as you watch this simple example.
What I'm going to do is change the programs to allow a user to specify which number they'd like to see
the square of.
So let's start with listfor.py.
So I'm going to change that code a little bit.
Basically, I'm going to add a new line of code on line five and push down the other code to line 7.
That line of code's going to be number
equals int parentheses input parentheses double quotes.
Please enter a number,
and I'll tell you its square,
and then a colon and a space there, and obviously, two closing parentheses.
Alright, now I'll just close down the project pane to give us a bit more space there. And then down here,
instead of printing squares I'm actually going to put some other code in there, I'm going to put - well actually
I'll leave that in there,
on that line. The line above I'm going to type index underscore pos is equal to numbers dot index parentheses
number.
Then we're going to adjust line 12 slightly and print squares, and left and right square brackets, index underscore
pos.
So both lists now contain the same number of items.
Squares has being created from the list in numbers,
so it will contain an item for each item in numbers.
Now on line 11, we find the index position of the required number in the numbers list, and on the
next line, line 12, we get the item at the same position from the squares list.
Now I haven't cluttered the code with error handling, to make sure you only enter valid numbers.
The input has to be a number from 1 to 6 inclusive.
So let's go ahead and run this,
and down here
we'll start with the number four.
Now that doesn't look right,
and in fact any number from 1 to 6 will give the same result here,
36. So let's just try another example there. We'll try number one, 36 again, and we'll just try one other one just to confirm
this.
Let's say the number six, and still returning 36.
Now the reason for this bug is because the variable number is also used as the loop control variable.
So we've got number up here defined on line 5,
and we're also using number here on line 8, as the loop control variable.
So when the for loop terminates, number has the value of the last item in numbers, up here.
So that's a 6.
And that's not good.
So let's see what happens with our list comprehension in listcomp.py.
Now the code I'm going to add is exactly the same as I've added in listfor,
and therefore I can just copy and paste it. So I'm going to copy that line 5, copy, come back on here,
over to here.
I'm going to remove that commented out code there. Alright I'm going to paste that on line 5, pushing down this code to line 7.
And what I'll do then is uncomment that change so we're not using a range anymore, and I'm going to delete
that range.
So we're back to using our standard, back to using numbers instead of a range.
Now I didn't have to do that. I didn't need to make that change but it makes the code the same as list
for.
So now if I try running this, running listcomp, then enter the number four. Then actually, what I need to
do
then is also copy
this other code over, so let's do that as well, replacing the code from line nine,
and run it again. Then we're going to use the number four. This time we get the correct value 16, and just try one
more.
This now should work correctly from all the values from 1 to 6, so we'll just try 1, one more, and we'll just
try 6, 36.
Alright, so our list comprehension treats the variable number just like a loop control variable in languages
like C or Java.
Now there's no side effect, and the value of any existing variable with the same name isn't modified.
Now that's an important difference and a good reason to use a list comprehension rather than a for loop.
Now as well as more concise code, you get automatic protection from bugs caused by side effects like
this one.
Now as I mentioned, Python 2 does leak the loop control variable.
It's available in the outer scope, and would replace the value of any existing variable with the same
name.
Now that was fixed in Python 3, and you can find Guido van Rossum's comments on it in a blog post. I'll just
quickly
briefly bring them up on the screen.
Now I'm not going to read through that now, but it's always interesting to read anything that the creator
of your programming language has to say about a particular feature. Alright so we've now covered
the basics of comprehensions but there's still more to look at.
Now we're going to do that in the next few videos.
At the moment though it's time for a challenge - some exercises to practice what we've covered so far.
Now I've created a new Python file called challenge one dot python for this first exercise, and you can
get that from the resources section of this video.
But I'm going to, basically, close down this listfor, and I'm going to open the project pane, and I'm going to close down the
other file, and I'm just going to create this new file now.
But you can just grab this from the resources section of this video, and I'm calling it challenge1.
Now I'm going to paste the code in.
Alright so that's the first challenge1,
that's the first exercise, and I'm going to paste in the code for the second one as well.
And then we'll actually go through the solutions in the next video. So New, Python File, challenge2 -
paste that in, and what I'll do is I'll stop the video here.
And that's so you can download the files without the answers, and in the next video we'll go through
the solutions to these challenges.
So I'll see you in the next video.